# Multiple Linear Regression, Part 1 in SAS

::: {.graybox}

<font size="4">**Goals**</font>

The goal of this software lesson is to learn how to

* fit a multiple linear regression model, and
* set the reference group for a categorical predictor.

:::

## Dataset

Let’s use the Rheumatoid Arthritis dataset again.

Recall that the dataset, data dictionary, and dataset introduction can be found on Canvas, titled *RheumArth.csv*, *RheumArth Data Dictionary.pdf*, and *RheumArth Data Introduction.pdf*, respectively.


``` r
proc import
  DATAFILE = "/<filepath>/RheumArth.csv"
  OUT = rheum_arth
  DBMS = csv
  REPLACE;
  GETNAMES = yes;
run;
```

### Multiple linear regression

In the previous course (PubH 6450: Biostatistics 1), you had an introduction to multiple linear regression. This week builds on that topic, including using a different function to fit the model and setting a reference group. (Note: You can still use the approach used in the previous course. The reason this new function is being presented is for consistency in the coding in this course.)

Recall that there are several reasons for building a model for a response variable. You may seek to assess which predictors matter or estimate the effect of the the exposure or treatment after adjusting for potential confounding factors or make predictions based on a model. The code for all of these is very similar, but the purpose will determine interpret and use the model results. 

In the Rheumatoid Arthritis study, suppose the researchers wanted to examine the relationship between the a disease activity measurement, `CDAI` (Clinical Disease Activity Indicator) value, and age groups (`AgeGp`), after adjusting for `Sex` and years since diagnosis (`Yrs_From_Dx`). In this example, `AgeGp` is the exposure of interest, and `Sex` and `Yrs_From_Dx` are considered to potential confounders. You include all three variables in the model but then only focus on the results for the `AgeGp` variable (as the results for this term are adjusted based on the other variables in the model). 

### Fit multiple linear regression model

- To fit a multiple linear regression model, use
    + `proc glm`, specifying the name of the dataset, 
    + the `CLASS` statement with all the categorical variables in the model that are not denoted as 0/1, and
    + the `MODEL` statment with the form `y = x1 x2 x3`, separating the x-variables with a space and including the options of `solution` to get obtain the table with the regression coefficient estimates and inferential results, `clparm` to obtain confidence intervals for the regression coefficients, and `alpha=` to specify the confidence level: 


``` r
proc glm data = rheum_arth;
  CLASS AgeGp;
  MODEL CDAI = AgeGp Sex Yrs_From_Dx / solution clparm alpha = 0.05;
run;
```

::: {.redbox}

<font size="4">**SAS TIP**</font>

For a continuous response variable, using the `proc reg` function is the same as using the `proc glm`. The benefit for using `proc glm` over `proc reg` is that you can use the categorical variables directly in the procedure using the `CLASS` statement, rather than having to recode them as an indicator variable (0 or 1).

:::

<br>

Note: GLM stands for General Linear Model and is used for continuous response variables.

The output provides seven tables and one plot. The main information of interest for this week is in fourth (where first column is `R-Square`) and seventh (where first column is `Parameter`) tables.

The fourth table displays the $R^2$ value. Notice that `proc glm` does not provide adjusted $R^2$ values. If this is of interest, you will have to use `proc reg`. 

The seventh table provides the information for the regression coefficients, including:

 - the regression coefficient values under the column `Estimate`, with the intercept denoted in the first row and the regression coefficients denoted in the subsequent rows. 
    + For categorical variables, SAS will display all categories but the category that is denoted as the reference group will have a row with `0` or `.` values. Based on the output, there is a row denoted `AgeGp 1` that has non-zero or non-missing values in that row, which means that row is for the `AgeGp` categorical variable and the category of interest (1) is the value 1 (which represents 40 to 70 years (“control”)) and thus the reference category (0) is the value 2 (which represents 75 and older (“elderly”)) . 
    
- The standard errors for each of the regression coefficients are under the column `Standard Error`. This value is used to create confidence intervals and *t*-test statistics for the coefficients.

- the *t*-test statistics for testing the regression coefficients under the column  `t Value`. It is found by taking `Estimate` divided by `Standard Error`.

- the *p*-values for testing the regression coefficients in the column `Pr > |t|`. 

- the lower and upper limits to the 95% confidence interval for the intercept and all of the regression coefficients (`95% Confidence Limits` column). 
    + Recall that `alpha=` option specifies the confidence level, where confidence level = $1-\alpha$. For example, for a 95% confidence interval, you would specify $\alpha$ as $1-0.95=0.05$. The default confidence level is 95%, but you can modify the value for the `alpha=` option if you want a different confidence level (e.g., 0.10, 0.01).
    
::: {.bluebox}

<font size="4">**Additional Resources**</font>

For additional SAS resources on multiple linear regression, see:

* <a href="https://www.listendata.com/2015/08/linear-regression-with-SAS.html"> Linear Regression with SAS </a> (Listen Data)
* <a href="https://nhorton.people.amherst.edu/sasr2/samplechapter.pdf"> Linear Regression and ANOVA </a> (Nick Horton textbook)

:::

### Set the reference group for a categorical predictor

Suppose you wanted to a particular category to be the reference group in the model. Recall that SAS automatically organizes categorical variables in ascending order of the categories (0-9 or A-Z), so lower value (e.g., 1 or 0 or A) would be in the category of interest and higher value (e.g., 2 or 1 or Z) would be reference group. 

For example, in the Rheumatoid Arthritis study, suppose the researchers wanted to compare the 75 year old and older group (denoted as 2, elderly) to the 40 to 70 year old group (denoted as 1, younger), which is opposite from what SAS does by default. 

- To set the reference group for a categorical predictor in the model, use the code as presented previously but include `(ref="value")` next to the categorical variable you want to set the reference for:
    

``` r
proc glm data = rheum_arth;
  CLASS AgeGp(ref="1");
  MODEL CDAI = AgeGp Sex Yrs_From_Dx / solution clparm alpha = 0.05;
run;
```

::: {.redbox}

<font size="4">**SAS TIP**</font>

When setting the reference group, make sure to put the value in quotation marks. That is, **do this: ref="value"**, NOT this: ref=value.

:::

<br>

The output is similar to the previous output, except now you can see that the row for `AgeGp 2` has non-zero and non-missing values in it, which means that row for `AgeGp 1` is thus the reference category.

<br>

::: {.redbox}

<font size="4">**SAS TIP**</font>

If the variable is already denoted as a 0/1 variable (e.g., the *Sex* variable in the *rheum_arth* dataset), it is highly recommended that you do not use it in the `CLASS` statement and just put the variable in the model as is. Even though the software will treat the variable as numerical, it is modeled appropriately as a binary predictor. This is also known as a dummy variable or indicator variable (more on this in an upcoming week).

These software lessons will explicitly use the `CLASS` statement for the categorical variables that are not denoted as 0 or 1 to call attention to categorical predictors in the model.

:::
