# Multiple Linear Regression, Part 3 in SAS

::: {.graybox}

<font size="4">**Goals**</font>

The goal of this software lesson is to learn how to

* obtain model diagnostics to check assumptions and evaluate the model fit.

:::

## Dataset  

Let’s use the Rheumatoid Arthritis dataset again.

Recall that the dataset, data dictionary, and dataset introduction can be found on Canvas, titled *RheumArth.csv*, *RheumArth Data Dictionary.pdf*, and *RheumArth Data Introduction.pdf*, respectively.


``` r
proc import
  DATAFILE = "/<filepath>/RheumArth.csv"
  OUT = rheum_arth
  DBMS = csv
  REPLACE;
  GETNAMES = yes;
run;
```

## Model Diagnostics

In this software lesson, you are going to obtain model diagnostics for an example used in a previous software lesson.

That is, in the Rheumatoid Arthritis study, you examined the relationship between the a disease activity measurement, `CDAI` (Clinical Disease Activity Indicator) value, and age groups (`AgeGp`), after adjusting for `Sex` and years since diagnosis (`Yrs_From_Dx`). The code for fitting this model is presented again (for reference).


``` r
proc glm data = rheum_arth;
  CLASS AgeGp(ref="1");
  MODEL CDAI = AgeGp Sex Yrs_From_Dx / solution clparm alpha = 0.05;
run;
```

Recall that you learned how to check model assumptions using plots in the previous course (PubH 6450: Biostatistics 1, see Week 14: Software Lessons). Now you are going to obtain additional model diagnostics to evaluate the model fit.

### Calculate measures of model fit

To measure model fit, we can use adjusted R^2^ or PRESS.

**Adjusted $R^2$ and PRESS**

Adjusted $R^2$ provides information about model fit, with the higher the value, the more the model is able to explain the variability in the outcome (generally speaking). 

The PRESS (Predicted REsidual Sum-of-Square) statistic tests to see how well the model will predict on future data. The smaller the PRESS value, the better the fit.

- To calculate the adjusted $R^2$ and PRESS statistics, use
    + `proc glmselect`, specifying the name of the dataset, 
    + the `CLASS` statement with all the categorical variables in the model that are not denoted as 0/1 and setting the reference level using `(ref="value")` (if applicable), and
    + the `MODEL` statement with the form `y = x1 x2 x3`, separating the x-variables with a space and including the options of `selection = none` to obtain results for specified model and `stats = all` to display all model fit statistics: 


``` r
proc glmselect data = rheum_arth;
  CLASS AgeGp(ref="1");
  MODEL CDAI = AgeGp Sex Yrs_From_Dx / selection = none stats = all;
run;
```

The output presents eight tables, but the fit statistics, including adjusted $R^2$ (`Adj R-Sq`) and `PRESS`, are in the seventh table (the table where the first row is `Root MSE`).

### Check for outliers and influential points

To check for outliers, you can use various kinds of residual plots. Previously, you created a residual plot for evaluating model assumptions, but you can also examine standardized residual and studentized residual (i.e., "deleted residuals") plots to determine observations that seem *much* different than other observations. 

The statistics to detect highly influential points are Cook's distance, DFFITs, and DFBETAs.

**Studentized residual plot and Cook's distance**

From `proc glm`, you can get many diagnostic plots, including the studentized residual plot and a plot of Cook's distance (D) values. 

Standardized residuals are residuals that have been standardized by dividing by the estimated standard deviation of each residual, which takes into account the leverage/influence of an observation. Studentized residuals are similar to standardized ones, except its calculated from a model that does not include the observation in question. An observation is worth investigating if the studentized residual value is larger than $+/- 2$.

Cook's D measures how much the model changes when an observation is removed from the model. An observation is worth investigating if the Cook's D value is larger than 1.

- To obtain studentized residual plot and Cook's D plot, use the `proc glm` code as presented previously but include the option of `PLOTS(UNPACK) = DIAGNOSTICS` to produce the diagnostic plots: 


``` r
proc glm data = rheum_arth PLOTS(UNPACK) = DIAGNOSTICS;
  CLASS AgeGp(ref="1");
  MODEL CDAI = AgeGp Sex Yrs_From_Dx;
run;
```

The diagnostic plots are at the bottom of the output, with nine plots being displayed. 

The second plot is the studentized residual plot, and even has horizontal line indicators at -2 and 2 for a visual indicator on observations worth investigating. You can use this plot to investigate those observations that seem *much* different than the other observations, based on the model. For example, you can see several observations that have "extreme" studentized residual values. 

The sixth plot is the Cook's D plot. Similar to the studentized plots in this software lesson, you can use this plot to investigate those observations that have "large" influential values, based on the model. For example, you can see that there are no observations in this dataset that have "large" Cook's D values. 

**Create dataset with outlier and influential statistic values**

For the other outlier and influential statistics, in order to examine them via a plot, you need to use `proc glm` but tell SAS to save the statistics into a new dataset using the `OUTPUT` statement. 

- To create a new dataset with outlier and influential statistic values, use the code as presented previously but include the option `NOPRINT` to suppress displaying the results and use the `OUTPUT` statement, specifying the name of the new dataset in `out=` , and the statistics you want to save (e.g., `student` for standardized residuals; `dffits`; `cookd`; `rstudent` for studentized residuals) followed by how you want to name of the variable after the equals sign:


``` r
proc glm data = rheum_arth NOPRINT;
  CLASS AgeGp(ref="1");
  MODEL CDAI = AgeGp Sex Yrs_From_Dx;
  OUTPUT out = diagnostics student = studr dffits = dfits cookd = cd rstudent = rstudr;
run;
```

For reading the `OUTPUT` statement line, it says:

"Create a new dataset called `diagnostics` and save the standardized residuals (`student`) as `studr`, the DFFITs (`dffits`) as `dfits`, the Cook's D's (`cookd`) ad `cd` and the studentized residuals (`rstudent`) as `rstudr`."

Since you told SAS to not print the results, no results is displayed but SAS will pop open the `OUTPUT DATA` tab, where you can see new columns were added for these statistics.

**Standardized residual plot**

For standardized residuals, an observation is worth investigating if the standardized residual value is larger than 3 (meaning it is more than 3 standard deviations away from the model-fitted value).

- To create a standardized residual plot, 
    + first, create a copy of the `diagnostics` dataset and add a new column for observation number (`ObsID = _N_`).
    + Then, use 
        + `proc sgplot`, specifying the name of the dataset, 
        + the `SCATTER` statement, specifying the observation numbers for the x-axis (`x = ObsID`) and the standardized residuals for the y-axis (`y = studr`), 
        + (optional) the `XAXIS` and `YAXIS` statements with `label=` to specify the axes labels (in quotation marks), and 
        + the `REFLINE` statement, specifying where the lines should be placed (`-3 3`) for a visual indicator on observations worth investigating, and options for adding the horizontal lines (`axis = y`) and any additional arguments for customizing the plot (e.g., `lineattrs = ` for specifying line attributes; `color = ` for specifying the color of the line; `thickness = ` to indicate the thickness of the line): 


``` r
*Adding observation numbers to diagnostics dataset;
data diagnostics;
  SET diagnostics;
  ObsID = _N_;
run;

*Plotting the standardized residual for each observation;
*Adding a red horizontal line at -3 and 3;
proc sgplot data = diagnostics;
  SCATTER x = ObsID y = studr;
  XAXIS label = "Observation Number";
  YAXIS label = "Standardized Residuals";
  REFLINE -3 3 / axis = y lineattrs = (color = red thickness = 5);
run;
```

Similar to the studentized residual plot, you can use this plot to investigate those observations that seem *much* different than the other observations, based on the model. For example, you can see two observations that have "extreme" standardized residual values. 

- (optional) To obtain observation numbers for those "extreme" observations, use the `data` task, defining the name you want to call your new data set (e.g., `largestresidual`), then the `SET` statement to indicate the dataset you want to make a copy of, and the `WHERE` statement to subset the data to display only the observations that have an absolute value of standardized residuals that exceed 3:  


``` r
data largestresidual;
  SET diagnostics;
  WHERE abs(studr) > 3;
run;
```

::: {.redbox}

<font size="4">**SAS TIP**</font>

You could carry out a similar task for investigating the other outlier or influential statistics, but using the `cd` for Cook's D, `rstudr` for studentized residuals, or `dfits` for DFFITs.

:::

<br>

The output displays the rows of the observations that were flagged as potential outliers, according to the standardized residual values. 

**DFFITs**

The DFFITs (DiFference of FITs) statistic measures how much the model changes when an observation is removed. An observation is worth investigating if the DFFITs value is larger than 1 for small datasets, or, larger than $2\sqrt(\frac{p}{n})$ for large datasets, where p = the number of predictors and n is the number of non-missing observations used in the model. 

- To create a plot of DFFITs values verses observation number, use the `proc sgplot` code as presented previously but update the `y =` to be for the DFFITs variable (`dfits`), and update the `REFLINE` statement, specifying where the lines should be placed (`-0.242 0.242`) for a visual indicator on observations worth investigating:


``` r
proc sgplot data = diagnostics;
  SCATTER x = ObsID y = dfits;
  XAXIS label = "Observation Number";
  YAXIS label = "DFFITs Statistics";
  REFLINE -0.242 0.242 / axis = y lineattrs = (color = red thickness = 5);
run;
```

Note: The DFFITs threshold for this model is  $2\sqrt(\frac{3}{205}) = 0.24194$, because there were three predictors in the model and 205 non-missing observations used.

Similar to the other plots in this software lesson, you can use this plot to investigate those observations that have "large" influential values, based on the model. For example, you can see that there are about a dozen observations in this dataset that have "large" DFFITs values.

**DFBETAs**

Unfortunately, you can't obtain the DFBETAs using `proc glm`. If this is of interest, you will have to use `proc reg`. See <a href="https://blogs.sas.com/content/iml/2019/06/17/influence-regression-dfbeta.html">this resource</a> for more information.

### Collinearity and multicollinearity

Another consideration when evaluating model fit is whether there are issues of collinearity or multicollinearity. 

**Collinearity**

Collinearity happens when one predictor is highly correlated with another predictor. When there is collinearity, it can make the model unstable and give odd results. To investigate collinearity between predictors, calculate a correlation matrix. 

- To create a correlation matrix between predictors, use 
    + `proc corr`, specifying the name of the dataset, and
    + the `VAR` statement with all the predictors in the model: 


``` r
proc corr data = rheum_arth;
  VAR AgeGp Sex Yrs_From_Dx;
run;
```

::: {.redbox}

<font size="4">**SAS TIP**</font>

Note that `proc cor` only works on numerical variables.

:::

<br>

The table of interest is titled `Pearson Correlation Coefficients` (the second table in the output). The output displays the correlations coefficients between the possible pairs of variables (first value in the cell), in addition to the *p*-value for the correlation and the number of observations for each calculation. The correlation coefficients along the diagonal of the table are all equal to 1 because each variable is perfectly correlated with itself.You only need to look at the upper triangle OR lower triangle, for the information, since they both present the same values. 

**Multicollinearity**

Multicollinearity happens when one predictor is highly correlated with some combination of two or more other predictors. When there is multicollinearity, it can make the coefficient (beta) estimates less precise, leading to less precise inference. This is called “variance inflation”.

Variance inflation is measured by the Variance Inflation Factor (or VIF.) The variance inflation factor ranges from 1 to infinity. A VIF below 4 indicates the variable is minimally correlated with any other predictors, a VIF between 4 and 10 indicates moderate correlation, and a VIF above 10 indicates high enough correlation to affect the precision of the coefficient estimates and cast doubt on the effectiveness of the inferential results.

SAS does not give VIF directly for each variable. However, you can find the *tolerance* for each coefficient, which is $\frac{1}{VIF}$, by adding the `tolerance` option in the `MODEL` statement of `proc glm` (Note: Look for tolerances smaller than $0.25$ or $0.10$):


``` r
proc glm data = rheum_arth plots = all;
  CLASS AgeGp(ref="1");
  MODEL CDAI = AgeGp Sex Yrs_From_Dx / tolerance solution clparm alpha = 0.05;
run;
```

The table of interest is titled `Tolerances` (the third table in the output) and the `Type II Tolerance` column. The output displays the tolerance values for each regression coefficient in the model.
